Crowdsourcing Drug Discovery

Denise Myshko

Crowdsourcing efforts in drug discovery aim to use the power of the crowd to
look for potential hits and screen molecules against targets. One such effort
is World Community Grid, which was conceived and is managed by IBM.
Hosted on IBM’s SoftLayer cloud technology, World Community Grid provides free
computing power to scientists by harnessing the unused, surplus cycle time of a
number of volunteers’ computers and mobile devices from all over the globe.
World Community Grid software receives, completes, and returns small
computational assignments to scientists.

Volunteers download a program from the site that runs in the background. When
the volunteer’s computer is not doing anything else it can work on a small
piece of a bigger research problem.

“Collectively, over many machines around the world that donate their space and
time this way, we form a very large super computer,” says Dr. Viktors Berstis,
lead scientist for the World Community Grid. “We give this computing power to
researchers free of charge. It’s been a good formula for getting research done
that otherwise might not be attempted because of financial barriers.”

Dr. Berstis says the Grid was created in 2003 after a small test study to
screen for drug candidates for small pox. Since then, more than 3 million
computers and mobile devices used by about 700,000 people globally and 460
institutions from 80 countries have contributed virtual supercomputing power.

“People around the world are interested in science and health,” says Joseph
Jasinski, Ph.D., an engineer and executive for IBM’s Smarter Healthcare and
Life Sciences division. “People can volunteer their machine for whatever
purpose or they can pick a specific project to work on. People form teams. We
give them points and they track how much they’ve contributed to a research
project.”

Since the program’s inception, World Community Grid has powered nearly two
dozen research projects, donating more than 1 million years of computing time
worth $400 million to scientific research and enabled important scientific
advances in areas as diverse as cancer research, AIDS treatments, genetic
mapping, solar energy, and ecosystem preservation. More than 2.4 billion
research tasks have been completed.

It has enabled multiple breakthroughs, such as helping the Chiba Cancer Center
in Japan discover seven new drug candidates to fight childhood neuroblastoma.

The Scripps Research Institute’s Fight AIDS@Home project was the second project
to be launched on the World Community Grid. FightAIDS@Home, which had been run
independently by the Olson Laboratory since 2002, joined the World Community
Grid in November 2005. This effort not only aims to discover new drugs, but
also increase the knowledge around the structural biology of AIDS. In addition,
researchers are studying the mechanisms of multi-drug-resistance that the super
bugs of HIV use to escape the current anti-AIDS drugs.

“We haven’t analyzed all of the data yet, but we have had successes from a
scientific point of view,” Dr. Olson says. “Most of the computations that we’ve
run were focused on the HIV protease protein. The project did produce a
chemical that could, in fact, be an anti-HIV drug. But market forces are not
open to another protease inhibitor similar to those already available.”

Dr. Olson says Scripps is now looking for other footholds on the protease
protein that could disrupt its function in a different way, attaching at an
area that is distant from the active site of the protein.

“We are in collaboration with crystallographers and virologists who have
identified and looked at a number of compounds that are currently being
evaluated,” Dr. Olson says. “We have found new sites and new binders but don’t
know how functionally effective they will be.”

Scripps has several other projects being researched via the Grid. In June 2011,
Scripps submitted a proposal to IBM to create a new project on the World
Community Grid. This project is called the Global Online Fight Against Malaria.
In December 2014, Scripps began using the World Community Grid to screen
chemical compounds to identify new drug leads for treating Ebola.

“In collaboration with the Ollmann-Saphire Lab, we’re focusing on a number of
potential targets for Ebola,” Dr. Olson says. “The first targets we looked at
didn’t have very druggable sites. So now we’ve started on a second target,
which is actually a known enzyme, and should be more promising.”
